# Quadruped-Gait-EA
This repository hosts the code for evolving the gait parameters of a quadruped robot in Mujoco.


#### Local Ubuntu Setup

Open your terminal and run the following commands:

```bash

# Initialize and activate the virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install MuJoCo and parallel processing libraries
pip install mujoco numpy scipy
```

#### Repository Structure

The repository is structured in the following way:

*   `scene.xml` is setting the world with the robot and the rough terrain testbed, and defines the friction and gravity.

*   `view_robot.py` spawns one robot iteration with GUI enabled to see if its being spawned correctly, and can later be restuctured to view the best walking gait on the robot.

*   `test_spawn.py` spawns 100 robots in headless mode and this will be restructured to spawn the population of robots for the EA. (WIP to make it spawn robots in the desired terrain)

*   `convert.py` inside the `models` folder converts the exported model.urdf file of the robot to the .xml format which MuJoCo requires. This is required to run once initially when converting the urdf to the xml file mujoco expects.


#### Collisions

In MuJoCo, two objects will only physically collide if the following boolean logic returns `True`:
$( \text{contype}_1 \ \& \ \text{conaffinity}_2 ) > 0 \quad \text{OR} \quad ( \text{contype}_2 \ \& \ \text{conaffinity}_1 ) > 0$

By setting your robot's legs to `contype="0"` and `conaffinity="1"`:
*   **Self-Collision is Disabled:** If Leg A (`contype="0"`) approaches Leg B (`conaffinity="1"`), the bitwise AND operation evaluates to 0, and the physics engine ignores the contact.
*   **World Collision Remains Active:** If a robot foot (`conaffinity="1"`) touches the floor (`contype="1"`), the intersection is greater than 0. The solver registers the collision, allowing the robot to stand.

* **solimp**: Defines the impedance function (how the constraint force scales as bodies push into each other). The values `[0.9, 0.95, 0.001]` create a non-linear spring that gets exponentially stiffer the deeper the overlap.
* **solref**: Defines the time constant and damping ratio. `[0.02, 1]` tells the solver to recover from a penetration in 0.02 seconds with a critically damped response (no bouncing).


#### Simulation and Control Frequency

Simulation runs at 100Hz and controller runs at 50Hz. 
The robot model is imported from meshes we had, the terrain is generated by an hfield with desied rougness, height and friction parameters.


#### Execution Within the EA Algorithm

We want to optimize the parameters of the gait function by EA. The gait function will need to be determined from the paper with the parameters to be optimised.

We need to define a fitness function, right now we can move to evaluating how far the robot has moved in the intended direction as a measure of fitness and penalize movement in unintended direction.

The gait parameters will be used to generate the foot points for one cycle, which will be precomputed and passed onto the kinematics solver which will keep repeating the motion of the legs. This is already happening as part of a bezier curve formulation, the points are simply computed once and the leg cycles through them.

The walking cycle of the robot will be evaluated based on the fitness and we also have to figure out the rest of the standard EA stuff.
